Built-in Template Generation
============================

This tutorial is the user-facing path for packaged built-in templates. It shows
how to render a model with ``--template``, how to run the generated Python
runtime, how to smoke-test the native runtimes, and where to continue in the
generated README files.

If you are writing or maintaining templates, go to :doc:`/tutorials/render/index`.
This page is for users who want to consume the built-in outputs.

Example model
-------------

All examples use one small event-driven machine so that the generated behavior
is easy to compare across templates:

.. literalinclude:: simple_machine.fcstm
   :language: fcstm

The first empty cycle enters ``SimpleMachine.Idle``. Then ``Start`` moves to
``Running``, ``Stop`` moves to ``Stopped`` and increments ``counter``, and
``Reset`` moves back to ``Idle``.

Use ``--template`` for packaged templates
-----------------------------------------

For a built-in template, use the packaged-template name:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template python -o generated/python --clear

Current built-in template names are:

.. list-table:: Built-in templates
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Template
     - Main output shape
     - User entry point
   * - ``python``
     - ``machine.py`` plus generated README files
     - import the generated Python class
   * - ``c``
     - ``machine.h`` / ``machine.c`` plus generated README files
     - include ``machine.h`` from C integration code
   * - ``c_poll``
     - ``machine.h`` / ``machine.c`` plus generated README files
     - install ``EventChecks`` and call the zero-event ``cycle`` API
   * - ``cpp``
     - C core files plus ``machine.hpp`` / ``machine.cpp``
     - include ``machine.hpp`` and use ``MachineWrapper``
   * - ``cpp_poll``
     - C poll core files plus ``machine.hpp`` / ``machine.cpp``
     - include ``machine.hpp``, install ``EventChecks``, and use ``MachineWrapper``

Use ``-t`` / ``--template-dir`` only when you intentionally provide your own
custom template directory. It is not the default path for built-in templates.

Generated README files are part of the output contract
------------------------------------------------------

Every built-in template writes generated ``README.md`` and ``README_zh.md``
files into the output directory. This tutorial keeps the end-to-end path short;
the generated README files remain the detailed API and integration guide for
the concrete generated machine.

Do not copy the examples below blindly into a production control loop. Treat
them as smoke tests that prove the generated public entry points are usable,
then read the generated README before integrating hooks, hot start, no-heap
profiles, build-system details, or target-specific deployment rules.

Validation summary for this tutorial
------------------------------------

The examples below are backed by checked-in demo scripts and driver source
files under ``docs/source/tutorials/generation/``. The docs resource build
regenerates their output through ``make -C docs contents``.

.. list-table:: Tutorial validation matrix
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Template
     - Generated by demo
     - Runtime smoke checked by demo
     - Entry discipline shown here
   * - ``python``
     - yes, through ``python_runtime.demo.py``
     - yes, import + four cycles
     - generated class from ``machine.py``
   * - ``c``
     - yes, through ``native_runtime.demo.sh``
     - yes, if ``cc`` is available
     - C driver includes ``machine.h``
   * - ``c_poll``
     - yes, through ``native_runtime.demo.sh``
     - yes, if ``cc`` is available
     - C driver installs a complete ``EventChecks`` table
   * - ``cpp``
     - yes, through ``native_runtime.demo.sh``
     - yes, if ``cc`` and ``c++`` are available
     - C++ driver includes ``machine.hpp`` and uses ``MachineWrapper``
   * - ``cpp_poll``
     - yes, through ``native_runtime.demo.sh``
     - yes, if ``cc`` and ``c++`` are available
     - C++ driver includes ``machine.hpp`` and installs wrapper ``EventChecks``

The native output records the local OS, C compiler, C++ compiler, and CMake
version. That record is evidence for this tutorial run, not a promise that every
industrial or embedded compiler accepts the same flags.

Python template
---------------

Generate Python code with:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template python -o generated/python --clear

The generated ``machine.py`` is self-contained and does not require ``pyfcstm``
at runtime. A minimal consumer imports the generated class, creates a machine,
and calls ``cycle(...)``:

.. literalinclude:: python_runtime.demo.py
   :language: python
   :lines: 47-58

The demo output is intentionally small:

.. literalinclude:: python_runtime.demo.py.txt
   :language: text

C template
----------

Generate C code with:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template c -o generated/c --clear

The user-facing integration surface is ``machine.h``. The generated
``machine.c`` owns the runtime implementation. A small driver passes explicit
event-id arrays into ``cycle``:

.. literalinclude:: c_driver.c
   :language: c
   :lines: 28-53

The direct command used by the native demo is:

.. code-block:: bash

   cc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -pedantic -O2 machine.c app.c -lm -o demo

For project integration, prefer a normal build-system target. The generated
README includes a CMake skeleton and no-heap profile notes. On Windows and
non-POSIX embedded toolchains, adapt the math-library and compiler flags to the
owning toolchain instead of copying ``-lm`` unconditionally.

C poll template
---------------

Generate poll-style C code with:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template c_poll -o generated/c_poll --clear

``c_poll`` does not accept an external event-id array for each cycle. Instead,
the integration layer installs a generated ``EventChecks`` table once, and the
runtime calls the matching ``check_xxx`` callback while evaluating transitions.

The callback return value is the event truth for the current cycle:

- return non-zero when the event is active now
- return ``0`` when the event is inactive now

A machine with declared events must mount a complete table before
``cycle(&machine)`` can run. The checked-in C poll driver shows the pattern:

.. literalinclude:: c_poll_driver.c
   :language: c
   :lines: 64-83

The callback bodies can read sampled inputs, fieldbus mirrors, process-image
bits, or another user-owned snapshot. They should behave like read-only probes
for the current scan, not destructive consume/ack operations.

C++ wrapper template
--------------------

Generate C++ wrapper code with:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template cpp -o generated/cpp --clear

The ``cpp`` template includes the C runtime core, but user-facing C++ code
should include ``machine.hpp`` and use the generated ``MachineWrapper`` facade.
Do not make the tutorial or application driver bypass the wrapper by using
``machine.h`` as the main C++ entry point.

.. literalinclude:: cpp_driver.cpp
   :language: cpp
   :lines: 1-5,18-38

The demo compiles ``machine.c`` as C, then compiles ``machine.cpp`` and
``app.cpp`` as C++98-compatible C++ before linking them together.

C++ poll wrapper template
-------------------------

Generate the poll-style C++ wrapper with:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i simple_machine.fcstm --template cpp_poll -o generated/cpp_poll --clear

``cpp_poll`` follows the same event-check contract as ``c_poll``. The important
C++ discipline is that application code still enters through ``machine.hpp``
and wrapper methods. The wrapper exposes ``EventChecks`` and
``set_event_checks(...)`` so the driver does not need to treat the C header as
its main integration surface.

.. literalinclude:: cpp_poll_driver.cpp
   :language: cpp
   :lines: 1-5,57-85

Native smoke output
-------------------

The native demo generates and runs all four native-style templates when the
local toolchain is available:

.. literalinclude:: native_runtime.demo.sh.txt
   :language: text

Use this output to verify that the tutorial examples are synchronized with the
current templates. Use the generated README files for target-specific build
integration beyond this smoke path.

Choosing a template
-------------------

.. list-table:: Selection hints
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Need
     - Start with
   * - Python-only integration, tests, or simulator-aligned experiments
     - ``python``
   * - C integration where your application already collects event ids
     - ``c``
   * - C scan-loop integration where event truth is sampled on demand
     - ``c_poll``
   * - C++ integration that still wants the current C runtime core
     - ``cpp``
   * - C++ scan-loop integration with wrapper-level event checks
     - ``cpp_poll``

Next steps
----------

- Use :doc:`/tutorials/cli/index` for command-line option lookup.
- Use :doc:`/tutorials/render/index` when you want to design or maintain a
  template.
- Use the generated ``README.md`` / ``README_zh.md`` inside each output
  directory before integrating generated code into a real application.
