Quick Start
===========

This page gives the shortest practical path through pyfcstm: write one FCSTM
file, simulate it, inspect the structured model report, generate code from a
built-in template, and produce a PlantUML diagram source file.

For deeper explanations, continue to the dedicated tutorials linked from each
step. This page intentionally stays small and uses the built-in template entry
point ``--template`` instead of a repository-local template directory.

1. Write a small state machine
------------------------------

Create ``traffic_light.fcstm``:

.. literalinclude:: traffic_light.fcstm
   :language: fcstm

2. Simulate the behavior
------------------------

Run a few cycles without writing Python code:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm simulate -i traffic_light.fcstm -e "cycle; cycle; current"

The simulator is useful for checking lifecycle actions and transition timing
before generating target-language code. See :doc:`/tutorials/simulation/index`
for interactive sessions, hot start, batch mode, and execution semantics.

3. Inspect the model
--------------------

``inspect`` emits a structured JSON report with states, transitions, metrics,
derived graphs, and diagnostics:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm inspect -i traffic_light.fcstm -o traffic_light.inspect.json

The traffic light model is intentionally simple, so diagnostics may be empty.
The dedicated :doc:`/tutorials/inspect/index` tutorial shows richer diagnostics,
source spans, suggested fixes, and how these messages can guide LLM-assisted
repairs.

4. Generate code from a built-in template
-----------------------------------------

Use ``--template`` for packaged built-in templates:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm generate -i traffic_light.fcstm --template python -o _quick_start_python --clear

The generated directory includes runtime code and generated README files. The
full :doc:`/tutorials/generation/index` tutorial covers ``python``, ``c``,
``c_poll``, ``cpp``, and ``cpp_poll``.

Use ``-t/--template-dir`` only when you are intentionally rendering with a
custom template directory.

5. Generate a diagram source
----------------------------

For a stable, versionable diagram source file, use ``plantuml``:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm plantuml -i traffic_light.fcstm -o traffic_light.puml

When your environment has a PlantUML renderer available, ``visualize`` can
render a final ``png`` / ``svg`` / ``pdf`` file directly:

.. code-block:: bash

   pyfcstm visualize -i traffic_light.fcstm -t svg -o traffic_light.svg --no-open

The full visualization option matrix remains in
:doc:`/tutorials/visualization/index`.

Reproducible command transcript
-------------------------------

The following transcript is generated by the documentation build:

.. literalinclude:: quick_start.demo.sh
   :language: bash

Output:

.. literalinclude:: quick_start.demo.sh.txt
   :language: text
