Release Notes
=============

v0.6.0
------

This minor release adds an end-to-end FBMCQ bounded model checking workflow,
makes inspect reports useful to both people and LLM repair loops, expands the
built-in runtime templates to Python, C, C Poll, C++, and C++ Poll, and ships
substantially expanded bilingual documentation. It also contains public API and
CLI compatibility changes that require callers to review the migration notes.

FBMCQ and Bounded Model Checking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the FBMCQ property language, parser, model binding, macro expansion,
  transition-relation compiler, Z3 solving pipeline, and public
  :mod:`pyfcstm.bmc` APIs. The language covers reachability, coverage, safety,
  bounded liveness, response, assumptions, and initial-state constraints.
- Added ``pyfcstm bmc`` for one FCSTM model and one FBMCQ query. The default
  terminal report states whether the bounded property holds before showing the
  SAT/UNSAT solver diagnostic, supports optional ANSI color, and requires every
  decoded SAT witness to pass structural validation and simulator replay.
- Added a stable structured JSON result for CI, tools, and LLM consumers, with
  a downloadable schema in the BMC result protocol reference.
  The envelope preserves polarity-aware outcomes, solver timing, witness and
  replay records, diagnostics, and the matching process exit code.

Inspect and Diagnostics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Changed ``pyfcstm inspect`` to default to a checker-style human report with
  aligned source spans, nearby source context, compact severity labels, and
  ``--color auto|always|never``. Files, pipes, and machine formats remain free
  of ANSI escapes.
- Kept the stable machine report under ``--format json`` and added
  ``--format llm-json`` and ``--format llm-md`` using schema
  ``pyfcstm.inspect.llm.v1``. LLM reports carry source context, provenance,
  repair guidance, and explicit do-not notes.
- Expanded static and verify-backed diagnostics, including numeric and guard
  reasoning, while keeping solver-backed inspect checks behind the existing
  explicit enablement and safety gates.
- Added isolated multi-provider repair evaluations that test whether a consumer
  can locate, explain, repair, and replay real diagnostics without access to
  hidden repository context.

Simulation and Runtime Semantics
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Hardened hot start, pseudo-state routing, DFS limits, stack stabilization,
  speculative rollback, expression short-circuiting, persistent-variable
  normalization, event ownership, history resizing, and terminal queries.
- Added :class:`pyfcstm.simulate.CycleResult` event accounting and strengthened
  abstract-handler registration, decorator scanning, execution context, named
  action references, warning metadata, and session-copy behavior.
- Extended the shared semantic fixture corpus so the simulator and generated
  runtimes are checked against the same cycle-by-cycle state, variable, event,
  history, callback, and failure behavior.

Built-In Templates and DSL
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the first-class ``cpp`` and ``cpp_poll`` built-in templates alongside
  ``python``, ``c``, and ``c_poll``. C-family templates use CMake-driven native
  checks, simulator-alignment fixtures, wrapper smoke tests, and explicit
  deployment profiles without requiring heap allocation in the runtime core.
- Added ordered combo-transition triggers that combine event and guard terms in
  one cycle. They expand into traceable pseudo relay states while preserving
  source metadata, guard/effect order, rollback, PlantUML output, inspect
  reports, simulation behavior, and generated-runtime alignment.
- Added template-suite detection and dedicated representative/full-suite jobs
  so source-template dependencies and native toolchain coverage fail closed
  without forcing every ordinary change through every expensive native suite.

LLM Prompt Resources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the packaged FBMCQ authoring guide and integrity-checked public APIs:
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_fbmcq_language_guide_prompt_for_llm`,
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_fbmcq_language_guide_prompt_path_for_llm`, and
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_fbmcq_language_guide_prompt_metadata_for_llm`.
- The FCSTM and FBMCQ guide APIs now live in dedicated modules while
  :mod:`pyfcstm.llm` remains the compact public import surface. Both Guide
  resources use adjacent SHA-256 sidecars generated by ``make sha256``.
- Added standalone FBMCQ Guide evaluation fixtures for seven property kinds,
  full-source and known-fact task forms, oracle checks, anti-vacuity checks,
  mutation discrimination, and trace replay. Provider transcripts remain
  repository evidence rather than package data.

Documentation and Release Artifacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Reorganized the bilingual documentation around Tutorials, How-to Guides,
  Explanations, and Reference material, with runnable examples and dedicated
  coverage for the DSL, simulation, inspect, templates, and BMC workflows.
- Added bilingual BMC Tutorial and How-to material, three mathematical
  Explanation pages, and exhaustive query/result Reference pages. The
  explanations derive 40 labelled, implementation-traceable equations and are
  verified in MathJax HTML and XeLaTeX PDF output.
- Hardened the bilingual Sphinx PDF path with isolated builds, XeLaTeX/CJK font
  checks, structural/content validation, adversarial self-checks, and complete
  contents/index verification. GitHub Releases now attach validated English and
  Chinese PDF manuals in addition to package, CLI, and VSIX artifacts.

Verification and Inspect
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Removed the unimplemented ``bounded_reachability``, ``symbolic_bfs``,
  ``bounded_safety``, ``bounded_invariant``, and ``path_witness`` entries from
  :data:`pyfcstm.verify.REGISTRY`. The registry now contains only its 14
  callable structural and SMT-local algorithms.
- Removed the verify-only taxonomy values ``bmc_search``, ``k_unrollings``,
  ``k_unrollings_times_branching``, and ``bmc_unrolled``. BMC queries and
  witnesses are exposed by :mod:`pyfcstm.bmc`, not through verify or inspect.

Compatibility Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BMC results are bounded by the query's ``<= N`` and are not unbounded proofs.
Scripts must consume ``--json`` instead of parsing human wording, color, or
live timing. SAT means a witness for witness-polarity properties and a
counterexample for counterexample-polarity properties; use the reported
property verdict or ``result.outcome`` rather than treating SAT as success.

The default ``inspect`` output is now intended for humans. Existing scripts
that parsed the former default JSON output must pass ``--format json``. LLM
automation should use ``llm-json`` or ``llm-md`` rather than parsing the human
report.

Code that referenced the removed verify registry keys or taxonomy values must
migrate to the public :mod:`pyfcstm.bmc` query APIs. The ``inspect`` CLI no
longer accepts the removed BMC-only values merely to reject them in application
code; Click now reports them as invalid choices with usage exit status ``2``
instead of the former policy-error status ``1``.

The five built-in templates remain marked experimental. The VSCode extension
continues to use its own independent version line and is not versioned as
``0.6.0`` by this Python package release.

v0.5.0
------

This release is a minor release rather than a ``v0.4.2`` patch release. It adds
new user-facing APIs, CLI surfaces, packaged LLM resources, verification-backed
diagnostics, DSL condition operators, and simulator semantic fixes. Existing
models should review the compatibility notes before upgrading.

Verification and Inspect
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added the :mod:`pyfcstm.verify` package as the public entry point for raw
  verification algorithms, registry metadata, complexity taxonomy, and inspect
  gating helpers.
- Added SMT-local verification algorithms for guards, effects, lifecycle
  relations, transition shadowing, and composite initialization checks.
- Integrated inspect-eligible verification algorithms into
  :func:`pyfcstm.diagnostics.inspect_model` and the ``pyfcstm inspect`` CLI.
  Verify-backed checks stay opt-in through ``enable_verify=True`` or
  ``pyfcstm inspect --enable-verify``.
- Added inspect safety gates for complexity tier, call-count scaling, and SMT
  timeout forwarding. BMC-style search remains outside the automatic inspect
  path.

Diagnostics and CLI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Expanded the structured diagnostics catalog to 59 codes: 20 errors,
  32 warnings, and 7 infos.
- Added verify-backed diagnostic coverage while keeping the default inspect
  path static unless verification is explicitly enabled.
- Added ``pyfcstm inspect`` for stable JSON output matching
  ``inspect_model(model).to_json()``.
- Preserved Python / jsfcstm diagnostic-surface parity for normalized code,
  severity, and reference payloads used by editor integrations.

LLM Grammar Guide
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Added :mod:`pyfcstm.llm` with
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_grammar_guide_prompt_for_llm`,
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_grammar_guide_prompt_path_for_llm`, and
  :func:`pyfcstm.llm.get_grammar_guide_prompt_metadata_for_llm`.
- Packaged the official LLM-facing FCSTM grammar guide as
  ``pyfcstm/llm/fcstm_grammar_guide.md``.
- Added a packaged SHA-256 sidecar and runtime integrity verification for the
  grammar guide prompt. Callers may downgrade integrity failures to warnings
  when they intentionally need to inspect a damaged or development resource.
- Added standalone ``llm_eval/`` fixtures and reports for prompt-quality
  validation. These files are repository evaluation assets and are not packaged
  into PyPI distributions.

Simulation and Built-In Templates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Hardened simulator semantics around speculative rollback, hot-start
  initialization, event normalization, lifecycle action references, abstract
  handler contracts, and cycle boundary behavior.
- Added a semantic fixture corpus for simulator and generated-runtime alignment.
- Stabilized generated Python runtime metadata, callback rollback behavior, and
  expression-error wrapping.
- The packaged built-in template flow remains available through
  ``pyfcstm generate --template ...``. Current packaged templates are
  ``python``, ``c``, and ``c_poll``; the VSCode extension has its own
  independent version line and is not versioned as ``0.5.0`` by this Python
  package release.

DSL Expression Operators
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This release extends ``cond_expression`` with three boolean operators for guard
conditions and other boolean expression sites:

- ``A => B`` and ``A implies B`` express implication. The canonical DSL spelling
  is ``=>``. Implication is right-associative, so ``A => B => C`` means
  ``A => (B => C)``.
- ``A xor B`` expresses boolean exclusive-or. Chained ``xor`` is a
  left-associative boolean parity chain, not an exactly-one-of-many operator.
- ``A iff B`` expresses boolean equivalence and is the readable spelling of
  boolean equality. Chained ``iff`` expressions use the same boolean equality
  precedence layer as ``==`` and ``!=``.

Compatibility Notes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``implies``, ``xor``, and ``iff`` are now reserved DSL keywords. Existing
machines that used these names for variables, states, or events must rename
those identifiers before using this release.

``->`` remains the state-transition arrow and is not an implication operator in
guard conditions. Use ``=>`` or ``implies`` instead.

``^`` remains the numeric bitwise XOR operator. It can be used inside arithmetic
expressions that are compared in a guard, for example:

.. code-block:: fcstm

   StateA -> StateB : if [(flags ^ 0xFF) == 0];

It is not a boolean XOR spelling:

.. code-block:: fcstm

   StateA -> StateB : if [a > 0 xor b > 0];   // valid
   StateA -> StateB : if [(a > 0) ^ (b > 0)]; // invalid
   StateA -> StateB : if [true ^ false];      // invalid

The verification and inspect APIs are new public surfaces in this release. They
are intended to be stable at the function and JSON-contract level, but callers
should still treat precise diagnostic wording and solver evidence text as
diagnostic payloads rather than hard-coded parsing targets.
